# B.R.E.A.D

No, I don't mean the stuff you use to make sandwiches. 

BREAD is a controller action pattern used to map actions against operations that can be performed on a resource. You've probably heard of CRUD, well BREAD is similar, however it breaks the read action out into two, a crucial difference. 

BREAD is an acronym, just like CRUD:

* B - Browse
* R - Read
* E - Edit
* A - Add
* D - Delete

BREAD is implemented within `\Nooku\Framework\ControllerModel` for controllers that map to a resource. A resource is typically something that exists, like a product or an article, that can be requested or modified in some way. 


### Browse

The browse action is executed whenever the plural of the view is requested (the controller loaded is always the singular of the view). For example, products, articles, posts. The browse action returns a DatabaseRowset of resources returned from the model. 

Browse executed contextually based on the plurality of the view via an HTTP GET request and is dispatched via the RENDER action.

### Read

The read action is executed whenever the singular of the view is requested. For example, product, article, post. The read action always returns a DatabaseRow of the resource returned from the model. 

Read is executed contextually based on the singularity of the view via an HTTP GET request and is dispatched via the RENDER action.

### Edit

The edit action modifies an existing resource and returns either a 205 (Reset) HTTP status Content, if data was modified, or a 204 (No content) HTTP status if the data was not changed.

Edit is executed contextually based on the uniqueness of the model state. If the model state is unique, then when issuing an HTTP POST request, an edit action will be performed. Edit is dispached via the POST action.

### Add

The add action modifies an existing resource and returns either a 201 (Created) HTTP status, if a new resource is created, or an exception is thrown if the resource could not be created.

Add is executed contextually based on the uniqueness of the model state. If the model state is unique, then when issuing an HTTP POST request, an add action will be performed. Add is dispached via the POST action.

### Delete

The delete action deletes a resource or a set of resources. A 204 (No content) HTTP status is returned if the resource is deleted, an exception is thrown if not. Delete is dispated directly via the HTTP Delete method.

---

### Why?

Separating browse and read allows for more flexibility, specifically with testing, behaviors, events, etc. Standardising on the above structure allows a base controller to handle the majority of requests to retrieve or modify a resource. 

Most actions that apply to a resource fall into the 5 categories above. If you find yourself having to create additional custom actions, then chances are, you're doing something wrong. You should not implement actions like actionPublish() or actionEnable(). Those should be achieved through an edit action and passing the data to change as context. Binding context into your action names decreases flexibility, forces you to write more duplicate code, and makes testing more laborious.

#### Notes:

The default controller extends the model controller, so for most controllers that map to resources, you do not need to create your controller file/class, nooku will handle finding the right controller for you. 

Bearing that in mind, if you need to create a view that is not associated with a resource, like "checkout" for example, then you must create a controller class that extends `\Nooku\Framework\ControllerView`